A Superguide to Advanced Shaders in Babylon.js: From Textures to Dynamic Weather
Part I: The Foundation: The GPU Rendering Pipeline in Babylon.js
Before embarking on the creation of complex visual effects, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying rendering architecture is paramount. In real-time 3D graphics, and specifically within the Babylon.js framework, the final image on the screen is the result of a sophisticated collaboration between the Central Processing Unit (CPU) and the Graphics Processing Unit (GPU). This foundational part of the guide will dissect this relationship, explain the language of the GPU, and detail the mechanisms Babylon.js provides to bridge these two powerful processors. A firm grasp of these principles is the key to moving beyond rote implementation and toward true mastery of the rendering pipeline, enabling the creation of effects that are not only visually stunning but also highly performant.

Understanding the Role of Shaders: From JavaScript to Pixels
At its core, a shader is a program, but one that is not executed by the main CPU where the application's JavaScript logic resides. Instead, it is processed by the GPU, a highly specialized piece of hardware designed for massively parallel computation. This architecture allows the GPU to perform thousands of mathematical operations simultaneously, a capability that is essential for rendering the millions of pixels that make up a single frame in real-time.   

The process of rendering a 3D object in Babylon.js follows a distinct and critical flow, which represents a hand-off of data and instructions from the CPU to the GPU. This separation of concerns is the fundamental principle behind the performance of modern graphics applications.

CPU Phase: Scene Definition and Model Preparation: The process begins in JavaScript. When a developer writes code such as const box = BABYLON.MeshBuilder.CreateBox("box", {}, scene);, the Babylon.js engine, running on the CPU, interprets this command. It generates a virtual 3D model, which is an abstract representation of the object defined by collections of data. This data primarily consists of vertices, with each vertex containing attributes like position coordinates (x,y,z), normal vectors (which define the direction the surface is facing, crucial for lighting), and UV coordinates (2D coordinates used for mapping textures).   

GPU Hand-off: Packaging and Dispatch: Once the virtual model is prepared, the Babylon.js engine packages this vertex data into buffers. It also prepares the appropriate shader programs—either the engine's default shaders or custom ones provided by the developer. This complete package of data and instructions is then sent across the bus to the GPU for rendering. This hand-off is a critical step; minimizing the frequency and size of these transfers is a key aspect of performance optimization.   

GPU Phase: Massively Parallel Execution: The GPU receives the data and shader code and begins its work. It executes the shader programs across its vast number of parallel cores. This process is divided into several stages, but two are fundamental for developers to understand: the Vertex Shader and the Fragment Shader.   

The fundamental purpose of this pipeline is to offload the immense computational burden of rendering from the general-purpose CPU to the specialized GPU. This allows the CPU to remain free to handle application logic, physics, AI, and user input, while the GPU focuses exclusively on the task it was designed for: drawing pixels at incredibly high speeds.   

Vertex and Fragment Shaders Explained
The shader code that developers write is typically split into two distinct parts, each responsible for a specific stage of the rendering pipeline.

A Vertex Shader is a program that runs once for every single vertex in a mesh. Its primary, mandatory responsibility is to calculate the final 2D screen position of that 3D vertex. It answers the fundamental question: "Where on the screen does this point go?" It does this by taking the vertex's 3D position and transforming it through a series of matrix multiplications that account for the object's position and rotation, the camera's position and orientation, and the perspective projection. The final calculated position is assigned to a special built-in variable, gl_Position. Beyond this, the vertex shader can also manipulate vertex data to create effects like animation or deformation. For instance, a wave motion can be achieved by modifying the y-coordinate of a vertex's position based on its x-coordinate and a time variable. This creates a dynamic animation entirely on the GPU, without the CPU needing to update the mesh's geometry each frame, which is a highly efficient technique for animating large numbers of objects. The vertex shader also serves as the point to pass data, such as color or texture coordinates, to the next stage in the pipeline.   

A Fragment Shader, sometimes called a Pixel Shader, runs after the vertex shader. Once the vertex shader has determined the screen positions of a triangle's three vertices, the GPU rasterizes it, breaking the triangle down into a collection of individual pixels, or "fragments." The Fragment Shader is a program that runs once for every single one of these fragments. Its primary responsibility is to calculate the final color of that pixel. It answers the question: "What color is this pixel?" It receives interpolated data from the vertex shader (such as UV coordinates or vertex colors) and uses this information, along with textures and other inputs, to compute a final color value. This color is then assigned to the special built-in variable gl_FragColor (or a similar user-defined output). This is where all the detailed work of texturing, lighting, and complex material effects happens.   

An Introduction to GLSL: The Language of the GPU
To write shaders, developers use the OpenGL Shading Language, or GLSL. It is a high-level language with a syntax that is similar to C, designed to be compiled and executed directly on the GPU's hardware. Unlike JavaScript, GLSL is a strongly-typed language, meaning every variable must be declared with a specific type, and it is heavily reliant on vector and matrix mathematics to perform the transformations and calculations inherent to 3D graphics.   

Essential Syntax and Data Types
A working knowledge of GLSL's core components is necessary to write custom shaders.

Basic Types: GLSL includes standard data types like int for integers, float for floating-point numbers, and bool for true/false values. It is crucial to note that number literals must match the type; for example, assigning 2 to a float variable will cause an error, it must be written as 2.0.   

Vector Types: As 3D graphics deals with positions, colors, and directions, vectors are fundamental. GLSL provides vec2, vec3, and vec4 to hold 2, 3, or 4 floating-point numbers, respectively. These can be accessed using swizzling, for example myVec4.xyz to get a vec3.   

Matrix Types: Transformation matrices are central to 3D projection. GLSL provides mat2, mat3, and mat4 for 2x2, 3x3, and 4x4 matrices of floating-point numbers.   

Samplers: To read from textures, GLSL uses sampler types. The most common is sampler2D, which represents a 2D texture image.   

Precision Qualifiers: Shaders run on a wide variety of hardware, and developers can provide hints about the required numerical precision for floating-point calculations. This is done using qualifiers like highp, mediump, and lowp. It is standard practice to declare precision highp float; at the beginning of a vertex shader, as positional calculations require high accuracy. Fragment shaders can often use mediump for color calculations to improve performance on lower-end devices.   

Key Built-in Variables
GLSL provides a set of special built-in variables that serve as the inputs and outputs for the various shader stages. Two are absolutely essential:

gl_Position: This is a vec4 variable that is an output of the Vertex Shader. The developer must write the final calculated clip-space coordinates of the vertex to this variable. It is the primary result of the vertex shader stage.   

gl_FragColor: This is a vec4 variable that is an output of the Fragment Shader. The developer must write the final calculated RGBA color of the fragment to this variable. It is the primary result of the fragment shader stage.   

Shader Structure
Every vertex and fragment shader must contain a main function, which serves as the program's entry point. It is declared as void main(void) because it does not take any arguments and does not return a value directly; instead, it communicates its results by writing to the special output variables like gl_Position and gl_FragColor.   

Modern Shader Languages
While GLSL is the language for WebGL, the landscape of web graphics is evolving. The emergence of WebGPU introduces a new shading language called WebGPU Shading Language (WGSL). Babylon.js, particularly since version 8.0, has embraced this future by providing native support for WGSL. The engine's core shaders are available in both GLSL and WGSL, and tools like the Node Material Editor can output WGSL directly. For developers writing custom shaders, Babylon.js can automatically transpile GLSL code to WGSL, ensuring that projects can run on both WebGL and WebGPU contexts, though writing directly in WGSL is recommended for optimal performance on WebGPU.   

The Bridge to Babylon.js: Passing Data with Attributes, Uniforms, and Varyings
A shader program running in isolation on the GPU is useless; it needs data from the main application to do its work. Babylon.js manages three distinct categories of variables that act as the communication channels between your JavaScript code and your GLSL shaders.

Attributes: An attribute is a piece of data that is provided on a per-vertex basis. This is the mechanism used to pass the fundamental geometry of a mesh—such as its vertex positions, normals, UV coordinates, and vertex colors—from the CPU into the Vertex Shader. Each vertex receives its own unique set of attribute values. In your GLSL vertex shader, you declare an attribute with the attribute keyword (in GLSL ES 1.0) or in (in GLSL ES 3.0), for example: attribute vec3 position;. Babylon.js automatically wires up the mesh's vertex buffers to attributes with standard names like position, normal, and uv.   

Uniforms: A uniform is a variable whose value is constant for all vertices and fragments processed in a single draw call. Uniforms are the primary way to pass data from your JavaScript application to your shaders. This can include global information like the current time for animations, user-defined colors, light positions, or the crucial transformation matrices needed for 3D projection. In GLSL, you declare a uniform with the uniform keyword, for example: uniform float time; or uniform mat4 worldViewProjection;. From the JavaScript side, you will use methods on the material object to set the values of these uniforms before the mesh is rendered. Babylon.js automatically computes and provides several vital matrix uniforms, such as    

worldViewProjection, which simplifies the process of projecting 3D coordinates to the 2D screen.   

Varyings: A varying is a special type of variable used to pass data from the Vertex Shader to the Fragment Shader. You declare a varying in both shaders with the varying keyword (or out in the vertex shader and in in the fragment shader for GLSL ES 3.0), for example: varying vec2 vUV;. The vertex shader will calculate and write a value to the varying for each vertex of a triangle. The GPU then takes these three vertex values and automatically interpolates them across the surface of the triangle. This means that when the fragment shader runs for a specific pixel, it receives a smoothly blended value based on its proximity to the three vertices. This is the mechanism that allows a texture's UV coordinates, which are defined only at the vertices, to be correctly mapped across an entire surface, or for colors to blend smoothly in Gouraud shading.   

The architecture of Babylon.js provides a powerful abstraction layer over the raw complexities of WebGL, but it does not hide the fundamental principles of the graphics pipeline. While high-level materials like StandardMaterial handle all shader logic automatically, the framework provides direct and explicit access to the shader stages through ShaderMaterial. This requires developers to declare the attributes and uniforms their shaders will use, directly corresponding to the GLSL concepts. Consequently, learning to write shaders in Babylon.js is fundamentally learning the principles of WebGL and GLSL. Babylon.js serves as a robust and convenient framework for managing the boilerplate and data flow, making the skills acquired not only powerful within the Babylon ecosystem but also highly transferable to other real-time graphics environments.

Part II: Core Authoring Workflows: ShaderMaterial vs. Node Material
Babylon.js offers developers two primary and powerful pathways for creating custom materials: direct GLSL coding via the ShaderMaterial class, and a visual, graph-based approach using the Node Material Editor (NME). These two workflows are not mutually exclusive but represent different philosophies and cater to different needs and skill sets. The ShaderMaterial provides ultimate, low-level control for programmers comfortable with GLSL, while the Node Material democratizes shader creation, making it accessible to technical artists and developers who prefer a visual, iterative process. Understanding the strengths and trade-offs of each is crucial for selecting the right tool for any given task, from fine-tuned performance optimization to rapid visual prototyping.

The Coder's Approach: Mastering ShaderMaterial
The ShaderMaterial class is the foundational tool in Babylon.js for developers who wish to write their own GLSL vertex and fragment shaders. It acts as the essential bridge between the JavaScript environment of the scene and the GLSL environment of the GPU. It handles the compilation of the shader code, links it into a usable program, and provides the interface for passing data from the scene to the shader at render time.   

Instantiation and Configuration
A ShaderMaterial is created using its constructor, which requires four key pieces of information: a name, the scene, a route to the shader code, and an options object that declares the shader's data interface.   

const myShaderMaterial = new BABYLON.ShaderMaterial(name, scene, route, options);

The route parameter is particularly flexible, offering four distinct methods for loading the GLSL code, allowing developers to organize their projects in the most convenient way :   

External .fx Files: This is the most common and organized approach for production projects. The shader code is stored in separate files, typically with a .vertex.fx and .fragment.fx extension. The route parameter is a string representing the base path and name, for example, "./shaders/myCustomShader". Babylon.js will then automatically fetch ./shaders/myCustomShader.vertex.fx and ./shaders/myCustomShader.fragment.fx.   

DOM Elements: For simple examples, tutorials, or quick tests within a single HTML file, the GLSL code can be embedded directly into <script> tags with a custom type and an id. The route parameter is then an object specifying these IDs, for example: { vertexElement: "vertexShaderCode", fragmentElement: "fragmentShaderCode" }.   

ShadersStore: GLSL code can be stored as JavaScript strings in a global object, BABYLON.Effect.ShadersStore. This is useful when shader code is generated dynamically or needs to be managed programmatically. The route object would then be { vertex: "customShaderName", fragment: "customShaderName" }, where the keys in the ShadersStore are "customShaderNameVertexShader" and "customShaderNameFragmentShader".   

Source Strings: The most direct method is to pass the GLSL code as strings directly in the route object: { vertexSource: "...", fragmentSource: "..." }.   

The options object is where the developer explicitly declares the interface between their JavaScript code and the GLSL shader. It contains arrays of strings:

attributes: Lists all per-vertex attributes the vertex shader will use (e.g., ["position", "normal", "uv"]).

uniforms: Lists all uniform variables (e.g., ["worldViewProjection", "time", "fogColor"]).

samplers: Specifically lists all texture samplers (sampler2D) used in the shaders (e.g., ``).

defines: Lists any preprocessor #define directives that should be enabled in the shader code, allowing for conditional compilation of features.   

Passing Data at Runtime
Once the ShaderMaterial is created and assigned to a mesh, data can be passed to its uniforms and samplers from JavaScript, typically within the scene's render loop to create dynamic effects.

Uniforms: The ShaderMaterial instance provides a suite of set...() methods that are named according to the data type being passed. For example, to update a time uniform every frame, one would use myShaderMaterial.setFloat("time", currentTime); inside a scene.registerBeforeRender callback. Other common methods include setVector3, setColor3, setColor4, and setMatrix. This continuous updating allows for animations and interactive effects driven by the application's state.   

Textures: To pass a texture to a sampler2D uniform, a developer first creates a BABYLON.Texture object. This texture is then passed to the material using the setTexture method, which takes the name of the sampler in the GLSL code and the texture object as arguments: myShaderMaterial.setTexture("textureSampler", myTexture);.   

Using Includes for Code Reusability
For complex projects, it is common to have functions or blocks of code (like lighting calculations, noise functions, or fog logic) that are needed across multiple different shaders. To avoid code duplication, GLSL supports an include directive. Babylon.js exposes this functionality through the BABYLON.Effect.IncludesShadersStore. A developer can add a string of GLSL code to this store with a specific key, for example: BABYLON.Effect.IncludesShadersStore["myCustomFunctions"] = "...". Then, within any shader, the line #include<myCustomFunctions> will be replaced by the corresponding code block during compilation. Babylon.js itself uses this system extensively to provide modular access to its built-in functionalities like fog and lighting calculations, allowing custom shaders to easily integrate with standard engine features.   

The Visual Approach: An In-Depth Guide to the Node Material Editor (NME)
The Node Material Editor (NME) represents a significant evolution in shader authoring for Babylon.js. It is a powerful, web-based visual tool that abstracts the complexities of GLSL syntax into a more intuitive, graph-based workflow. Instead of writing lines of code, users create shaders by dragging, dropping, and connecting functional "blocks." This approach dramatically lowers the barrier to entry for creating custom materials, empowering technical artists, designers, and developers who may not be proficient in GLSL to build sophisticated GPU effects. The core philosophy of the NME is to replace complex shader language with a simple, visual process of connecting nodes.   

The NME Interface and Workflow
The NME (accessible at nme.babylonjs.com) is a standalone application with a clear and intuitive layout designed for rapid iteration.   

Interface: The editor is divided into several key panels: a list of available nodes on the left, a central graph area where the material is constructed, a real-time 3D preview on the right, and a properties panel for selected nodes.

Core Blocks: Every valid Node Material must have two essential output blocks that correspond to the main shader stages: a VertexOutput block and a FragmentOutput block. The graph must ultimately connect to the inputs of these two blocks to be compiled successfully.   

Input Blocks: These nodes are the starting points of the graph, providing data from the mesh or the scene. This includes mesh attributes like Position, Normal, and UV, which provide per-vertex data. It also includes system values like the World or ViewProjection matrices, and user-configurable inputs like Float, Color3, or Texture nodes, which will become uniforms that can be controlled from JavaScript.   

Operation Blocks: The vast library of operation blocks forms the core of the NME's functionality. These are nodes that take one or more inputs, perform a calculation, and provide an output. They range from simple mathematical operations (Add, Multiply, Sine) to complex vector math (Cross Product, Dot Product), texture sampling (Texture), and high-level PBR lighting components (PBRMetallicRoughness, Reflection). By connecting these blocks, a user visually constructs the data flow and logic of the shader.   

Using Node Materials in a Scene
Once a material is created in the NME, there are several ways to integrate it into a Babylon.js application.

Loading from the Snippet Server: The most common and convenient workflow is to use the NME's "Save as unique URL" feature. This saves the material's JSON definition to a server and provides a unique ID. In the application code, the material can then be loaded asynchronously with a single line: BABYLON.NodeMaterial.ParseFromSnippetAsync("UNIQUE_ID", scene). This returns a promise that resolves with the fully constructed material, ready to be assigned to a mesh.   

Building Programmatically: For procedural generation or more dynamic use cases, a Node Material graph can be constructed entirely in code. This involves instantiating the various block types (e.g., new BABYLON.InputBlock("position")) and connecting them using the .connectTo() method. This provides immense power but sacrifices the visual convenience of the editor.   

The "Generate Code" Button: Bridging the gap between the visual and programmatic approaches is the "Generate Code" button in the NME. This powerful feature inspects the current visual graph and outputs the exact JavaScript code required to build that same graph programmatically. This is an invaluable tool for learning how the programmatic API works and for bootstrapping the creation of procedurally generated materials.   

Strategic Decision-Making: Choosing the Right Tool for the Task
The choice between ShaderMaterial and the Node Material Editor is not about which is "better," but which is more appropriate for the specific task and the developer's skill set. Each has distinct advantages that make it the optimal choice in different scenarios.

ShaderMaterial offers absolute, low-level control. It is the tool of choice for graphics programmers who need to implement highly specific, non-standard algorithms, or who need to optimize shader code down to the individual instruction. It requires a deep understanding of GLSL but provides unparalleled power and flexibility. In contrast, the NME excels at rapid iteration and visual clarity. Its live preview and intuitive node-based system make it ideal for artists and designers, or for developers who need to quickly prototype complex materials that use standard rendering features like PBR lighting and fog. The NME's pre-built blocks for these features save a tremendous amount of time and effort compared to implementing them manually in GLSL.   

The following table provides a direct comparison to guide this strategic decision.

Table 2.3.1: Feature Comparison: ShaderMaterial vs. Node Material Editor (NME)
Feature	ShaderMaterial	Node Material Editor (NME)	Best For
Primary Interface	GLSL Code (in .fx files, JS strings, or <script> tags)	Visual Node Graph	Coders vs. Visual Thinkers/Artists
Learning Curve	High (Requires GLSL knowledge)	Low to Medium (Intuitive visual logic)	Rapid prototyping and artists
Control Level	Absolute, pixel-perfect control over shader logic.	High, but abstracted. Final GLSL is generated.	Fine-tuned optimization, non-standard effects.
Rapid Iteration	Slower (Edit code, save, refresh browser)	Very Fast (Live preview updates instantly)	Quick look development and experimentation.
Integration	Manual integration of BJS features via #includes and uniform binding.	Pre-built blocks for Fog, Lighting, PBR, Bones, etc.	Complex materials using standard BJS features.
Reusability	Good, via #include system for GLSL functions.	Excellent, via Custom Blocks and Frames.	Building a library of reusable visual effects.
Debugging	Standard GLSL debugging (e.g., Spector.js, color outputs).	Visual debugging (preview nodes), but final GLSL can be opaque.	Pinpointing specific mathematical errors in code.
Use Case Example	Volumetric raymarching, complex physics simulations on the GPU.	Creating a custom PBR material with unique texture blending.	N/A

Export to Sheets
The introduction of the Node Material Editor marks a significant paradigm shift in how developers and artists can approach shader creation for the web. By abstracting the often-intimidating syntax of GLSL into a visual, logical flow, it has democratized the ability to create high-end visual effects. This is evident in community discussions where beginners find the node-based approach far more approachable than raw code. The future of mainstream web graphics development is likely to lean heavily on such visual systems, empowering a broader range of creators.   

However, the continued prominence and support for ShaderMaterial reveals a core strength of the Babylon.js ecosystem. The framework is not forcing a single workflow. It provides a "no-compromise" solution that caters to both accessibility and raw power. ShaderMaterial remains the designated tool for experts who need to write custom, low-level GLSL, while the NME provides an accessible on-ramp for everyone else. This duality allows teams with diverse skill sets—from technical artists building materials visually to graphics engineers writing highly optimized shaders—to collaborate effectively within the same powerful framework.   

Part III: Crafting Immersive Environments: Dynamic Skies and Atmospheres
The sky is arguably the most dominant visual element in any outdoor 3D scene. It dictates the lighting, sets the mood, and establishes the sense of scale. Moving beyond a simple static backdrop to a dynamic, living sky is a crucial step in creating immersive and believable worlds. This section explores the spectrum of techniques available in Babylon.js for crafting skies, progressing from simple, texture-based skyboxes to fully procedural, physically-based atmospheric rendering that can simulate a complete day-night cycle.

Beyond the Static Box: Introduction to Dynamic Skies
The most fundamental technique for rendering a sky is the skybox. This involves creating a large cube that surrounds the entire scene and applying a unique image to the interior of each of its six faces. When viewed from the inside, this creates a seamless, panoramic illusion of a distant environment.   

Implementation of a Standard Skybox
The manual creation of a skybox in Babylon.js provides a clear understanding of the underlying mechanics:

Create the Box: A large cube mesh is created using BABYLON.MeshBuilder.CreateBox. Its size should be large enough to encompass the entire playable area of the scene.   

Create the Material: A StandardMaterial is created. A critical setting is material.backFaceCulling = false;, which ensures that the interior faces of the cube are rendered, as the camera will always be inside it.   

Load the Cube Texture: The sky images are loaded using new BABYLON.CubeTexture(...). This constructor takes a base path and automatically looks for six images with specific suffixes corresponding to the cube faces: _px.jpg (positive X), _nx.jpg (negative X), _py.jpg (positive Y), _ny.jpg (negative Y), _pz.jpg (positive Z), and _nz.jpg (negative Z).   

Apply the Texture: The CubeTexture is assigned to the material's reflectionTexture property. While it is not a true reflection, this channel is used to map the cubemap correctly. To ensure it is rendered as a background sky and not as a reflection, it is essential to set material.reflectionTexture.coordinatesMode = BABYLON.Texture.SKYBOX_MODE;.   

Create the Illusion of Distance: To prevent the camera from ever reaching the "walls" of the skybox, the property skybox.infiniteDistance = true; is set. This effectively locks the skybox's position to the camera's position, so it always appears infinitely far away.   

For convenience, Babylon.js also provides a helper function, scene.createDefaultSkybox(texture,...), which automates this entire setup process.   

Dynamic Switching and Image-Based Lighting
While the texture itself is static, the skybox can be made dynamic. By creating multiple CubeTexture objects (e.g., one for a sunny day, one for a stormy sky), a developer can switch between them at runtime by simply reassigning the skyboxMaterial.reflectionTexture property. This allows for abrupt changes in weather or environment. It is important to also re-apply the coordinatesMode setting each time the texture is switched to ensure correct mapping.   

Crucially, a skybox is more than just a decorative background; it is a source of light. This technique, known as Image-Based Lighting (IBL), is a cornerstone of modern Physically Based Rendering (PBR). By assigning the skybox's CubeTexture to the scene's global scene.environmentTexture property, PBR materials in the scene will use the colors and light information from the skybox to calculate realistic ambient lighting and specular reflections. This ensures that objects are lit in a way that is consistent with their environment, dramatically increasing realism. When dynamically switching skyboxes, it is vital to also update    

scene.environmentTexture to maintain this consistency between the visual background and the scene's lighting.   

Procedural Skies with SkyMaterial: Simulating the Daylight Cycle
For truly dynamic skies that can transition smoothly through a full day-night cycle, static textures are insufficient. Babylon.js provides a powerful solution in its Materials Library: the SkyMaterial. This is a specialized, procedural material that generates a sky effect entirely through shader calculations, without requiring any textures. It is based on a well-known analytical model for daylight, simulating the appearance of the sky and sun based on a set of atmospheric parameters.   

Implementation and Key Properties
Using the SkyMaterial is straightforward. After including the materials library, a developer creates a skybox mesh as usual and then instantiates and assigns the new material:

const skyMaterial = new BABYLON.SkyMaterial("skyMaterial", scene);
skybox.material = skyMaterial;    

The power of SkyMaterial lies in its configurable properties, which allow for complete control over the sky's appearance:

turbidity: A float value that represents the amount of haze or particles in the atmosphere. Lower values produce a clear, deep blue sky, while higher values create a hazier, brighter sky.   

luminance: Controls the overall brightness of the sky. This can be used to adjust for exposure.   

inclination: This is the key property for animating the time of day. It represents the vertical angle of the sun, ranging from -0.5 (sun below horizon) through 0.0 (sunrise/sunset) to 0.5 (sun at its zenith). Animating this value creates a natural progression of the sun across the sky.   

azimuth: Represents the horizontal rotation of the sun around the Y-axis, controlling its position from east to west.   

useSunPosition: Alternatively, setting this boolean to true allows the sun to be positioned directly using a Vector3 assigned to the sunPosition property, which can be useful for aligning with other scene elements.   

Practical Example: A Dynamic Day-Night Cycle
A smooth day-night cycle can be implemented by animating the inclination property over time within the scene.registerBeforeRender loop. As the inclination changes, the SkyMaterial shader automatically updates the sun's position, the sky's color gradient from the horizon to the zenith, and the overall lighting.

To make the scene lighting match the procedural sky, a DirectionalLight should be used to represent the sun. The direction of this light can be synchronized with the skyMaterial.sunPosition vector, which is automatically calculated from the inclination and azimuth. The intensity and color of the light can also be modulated based on the sun's inclination, dimming and warming in color as it approaches the horizon to simulate sunset. For even greater realism, the community-developed    

babylonjs-real-sun-moon library can be used to calculate astronomically correct sun and moon positions based on real-world latitude, longitude, and time, providing a highly accurate foundation for the SkyMaterial parameters.   

The Final Frontier: Implementing a Volumetric Atmospheric Scattering Shader
For the highest level of realism, especially for scenes viewed from space or featuring planetary-scale vistas, developers can turn to shaders that simulate the physics of light interacting with an atmosphere. This technique, known as volumetric atmospheric scattering, is responsible for the nuanced color gradients of the sky, the red hue of sunsets, and the soft glow of an atmosphere seen from orbit. While not a core part of the Babylon.js engine, excellent community-driven implementations are available that can be integrated as a post-process.   

Theoretical Background
The realistic appearance of a planetary atmosphere is primarily the result of two types of light scattering:

Rayleigh Scattering: This occurs when light interacts with particles that are much smaller than its wavelength, such as the molecules of air. This type of scattering is highly dependent on wavelength, scattering shorter (blue) wavelengths of light much more effectively than longer (red) wavelengths. This is why the daytime sky appears blue—we are seeing blue light scattered from all directions. At sunrise and sunset, the sunlight travels through much more of the atmosphere to reach the observer, scattering most of the blue light away and leaving the remaining reddish light to color the sun and surrounding sky.   

Mie Scattering: This is caused by larger particles in the atmosphere, such as water vapor, pollen, and dust. Unlike Rayleigh scattering, it is not highly wavelength-dependent and tends to scatter light forward. It is responsible for the white glare seen around the sun and the appearance of haze, fog, and clouds.   

A complete simulation also accounts for Ozone Absorption, where the ozone layer absorbs specific wavelengths, further influencing the final color of the sky.   

Implementation in Babylon.js
Integrating an advanced atmospheric scattering shader typically involves using it as a full-screen post-process. The process, based on available community solutions, is as follows:

Enable Depth Rendering: The shader needs to know the depth of the existing scene geometry to correctly composite the atmosphere behind or in front of objects. This is achieved by enabling the scene's depth renderer: scene.enableDepthRenderer(camera).   

Instantiate the Post-Process: The AtmosphericScatteringPostProcess is instantiated and attached to the camera. It requires several parameters, including the scene's camera, the mesh representing the planet, the planet's radius, the atmosphere's radius, and the light source representing the sun.   

Shader Logic (Conceptual): The GLSL fragment shader at the heart of this post-process performs a sophisticated simulation for each pixel on the screen. It uses a technique called raymarching. A ray is cast from the camera's position through the pixel. The shader then calculates the intersection points of this ray with the virtual spheres representing the atmosphere and the planet. It then takes multiple steps (samples) along the segment of the ray that passes through the atmosphere. At each sample point, it calculates the optical depth—the amount of light lost to scattering and absorption—along the path to the sun and along the path back to the camera. By accumulating the scattered light from all sample points, it computes a physically accurate color for that pixel, resulting in a highly realistic atmospheric effect.   

The progression from static CubeTextures to the procedural SkyMaterial and finally to full volumetric scattering shaders demonstrates a tiered system for environmental realism within Babylon.js. This allows developers to make a deliberate and informed trade-off between visual fidelity, ease of implementation, and computational performance. A stylized mobile game might be perfectly served by the SkyMaterial, while a high-fidelity space simulation would necessitate the performance cost of a full scattering post-process. This flexibility is a significant strength of the framework.

Furthermore, the availability of the most advanced atmospheric scattering solution as a community-driven project highlights the vibrant and collaborative nature of the Babylon.js ecosystem. The core engine provides powerful and stable tools, while the community often pushes the boundaries of what is possible, creating and sharing cutting-edge rendering techniques that extend the engine's capabilities for everyone.   

Part IV: Simulating Nature: Advanced Weather Effects
Creating a believable and dynamic environment often involves simulating weather. Effects like rain, snow, and fog not only enhance visual appeal but also contribute significantly to the mood and atmosphere of a scene. Babylon.js provides a versatile set of tools for implementing these effects, primarily through its robust particle systems for discrete phenomena like precipitation and its shader and post-processing capabilities for atmospheric effects like fog and clouds.

Creating Rain and Snow with Particle Systems
For rendering a large number of small, independent, and animated objects, particle systems are the ideal solution. They are highly optimized for effects like rain, snow, sparks, and smoke. Babylon.js offers both CPU-based (ParticleSystem) and GPU-based (GPUParticleSystem) options, with the latter providing significantly better performance for the massive particle counts often required for convincing weather.   

The Particle Helper
For developers looking to quickly add standard weather effects, the ParticleHelper provides the most direct route. It allows for the creation of complex, pre-configured particle systems with a single asynchronous call. For instance, a complete rain system can be instantiated with BABYLON.ParticleHelper.CreateAsync('rain', scene). To leverage the performance benefits of the GPU, a third argument can be passed: BABYLON.ParticleHelper.CreateAsync('rain', scene, true). This helper fetches a JSON configuration file that defines all the necessary properties for the effect, from textures to emission rates.   

Manual Particle System Configuration for Weather
Building a weather effect from scratch provides maximum control and is an excellent way to understand the system's mechanics. The process involves several key steps:

Instantiation: Create a new particle system, preferably a GPUParticleSystem for performance: const snowSystem = new BABYLON.GPUParticleSystem("snow", { capacity: 5000 }, scene);.

Emitter: The emitter defines the origin point or volume for the particles. For weather effects that should appear to cover the entire scene, a common and effective technique is to use a BoxParticleEmitter and parent its transform node to the active camera. This ensures that the emission volume moves with the player, creating the illusion of a persistent, world-spanning weather effect regardless of where the player moves.   

Texture: Each particle is a 2D sprite. A texture must be assigned to particleSystem.particleTexture. This would be an image of a single snowflake or a raindrop streak. The texture's alpha channel is used for transparency.   

Core Properties: The behavior of the particles is controlled by a wide range of properties. For weather, the most important are:

emitRate: The number of particles to create per second.

minLifeTime / maxLifeTime: The duration each particle will exist before being recycled.

minSize / maxSize: The range of initial sizes for the particles.

Movement and Forces: The initial direction of the particles is set using direction1 and direction2, which define a cone of emission. To simulate precipitation, a gravity vector is applied, typically a negative value on the Y-axis (e.g., new BABYLON.Vector3(0, -9.8, 0)), which will pull the particles downward. For snow, a small amount of    

dragFactor can be added to simulate air resistance, leading to a more gentle, fluttering descent.

Advanced Weather Shaders: Screen-Space Raindrops and Volumetric Fog
While particle systems are excellent for objects within the world, shaders and post-processes are used for effects that are applied to the entire screen or are atmospheric in nature.

Screen-Space Rain
To enhance the immersion of a rain effect, especially in a first-person perspective, a screen-space shader can be used to simulate raindrops hitting the camera lens and streaking down. This is implemented as a post-process that modifies the final rendered image of the scene. The core of this effect lies in the fragment shader. It takes the fully rendered scene as an input texture (   

textureSampler). It then samples a second texture—a normal map depicting water droplets and streaks. The normals from this second texture are used to distort the UV coordinates that are used to sample the scene texture. This distortion creates a convincing refraction effect, making it look as if the scene is being viewed through a layer of water. The effect is animated by slowly scrolling the UV coordinates of the water streak texture over time, giving the illusion of water running down the lens.   

Volumetric Fog and Light Scattering
Standard fog in Babylon.js (scene.fogMode) is a distance-based effect that fades objects to a solid color based on their distance from the camera. For more realistic and localized atmospheric effects, such as "god rays" (crepuscular rays) or dense ground fog, a volumetric light scattering approach is needed.   

Babylon.js provides a built-in VolumetricLightScatteringPostProcess for this purpose. This post-process simulates the scattering of light through a medium. To use it, a developer must create a mesh that acts as the light source, for example, a simple plane with a bright sun texture. The post-process then uses this mesh's position and color to generate light rays that emanate from it, creating the characteristic "god ray" effect. The appearance can be fine-tuned with properties like .density, which controls the thickness of the fog, and .decay, which controls how quickly the light attenuates.   

For effects like localized ground fog that is confined to a specific area, a custom shader is required. This would typically involve a fragment shader that calculates the world position of each pixel. If the pixel's position falls within a predefined volume (like a sphere or a box), a fog calculation is applied, blending the pixel's color with the fog color based on its depth within that volume. This allows for pockets of fog in specific areas of a scene, rather than a uniform global effect.   

Procedural Clouds: From CloudProceduralTexture to Volumetric Effects
Clouds are a critical component of any sky. Babylon.js offers methods ranging from simple procedural textures to the theoretical implementation of complex volumetric cloud shaders.

CloudProceduralTexture
For a simple, stylized cloudy sky, the Procedural Textures Library includes the CloudProceduralTexture. This is a texture generated entirely by a GLSL shader based on a noise algorithm. It requires no external image files. To use it, a developer creates an instance (new BABYLON.CloudProceduralTexture(...)) and typically applies it to the emissiveTexture of a skybox material. The texture has two simple parameters for customization: skyColor and cloudColor, which control the base colors used by the noise generator.   

Shader-Based Volumetric Clouds
For photorealistic, three-dimensional clouds, a much more advanced shader technique is required. This involves creating a volumetric effect through raymarching within a fragment shader, often applied to a large box that represents the cloud layer. While Babylon.js does not have a built-in material for this, the principles are well-established and can be implemented with a custom ShaderMaterial.   

The conceptual implementation involves the fragment shader casting a ray for each pixel through the cloud volume. As the ray marches through the volume, it samples one or more 3D noise textures (like Perlin or Worley noise) at each step. These noise values are used to determine the cloud density at that point in space. The shader then performs a lighting calculation, accumulating light and shadow based on the density and the direction to the sun. The final accumulated color is the color of the cloud seen from that pixel. This is a computationally intensive technique but produces stunningly realistic, dynamic clouds with true volume and self-shadowing.   

The creation of weather effects in Babylon.js exemplifies a core design principle of the engine: providing the right tool for each specific job. Discrete elements like raindrops are best handled by the ParticleSystem, which is highly optimized for rendering thousands of individual sprites. Full-screen visual modifications like lens effects are the domain of PostProcess shaders. Generative patterns like simple clouds are suited for ProceduralTexture. An effective developer must understand the strengths of each system to create effects that are both visually compelling and performant.

Furthermore, the choice between CPU and GPU particle systems underscores the critical importance of managing the computational load. For large-scale weather that defines an entire scene, offloading the per-particle calculations to the GPU via GPUParticleSystem is not just an optimization—it is a necessity for maintaining a smooth frame rate. This conscious decision-making about where computations occur is a hallmark of effective real-time graphics development.   

Part V: Advanced Materials: Realistic and Stylized Surface Shading
The visual fidelity of a 3D object is largely determined by its material—the set of rules and textures that define how its surface interacts with light. While basic materials can define color and shininess, advanced shaders unlock a new level of realism and artistic expression by simulating complex physical phenomena. This section delves into several advanced material effects available in Babylon.js, from physically-based effects like iridescence and subsurface scattering to powerful texturing techniques like parallax occlusion mapping and triplanar mapping, which solve common challenges in asset creation.

Elevating Realism with Shader-Based PBR Effects (Iridescence & Subsurface Scattering)
The Physically Based Rendering (PBR) workflow in Babylon.js, primarily through the PBRMaterial, provides a foundation for creating materials that behave realistically under different lighting conditions. Beyond the standard metallic and roughness properties, the PBRMaterial can be extended with more advanced components that simulate nuanced light interactions.

Iridescence (Thin-Film Interference)
Iridescence is the phenomenon where a surface's color appears to change based on the angle of view, commonly seen on soap bubbles, oil slicks, and the back of a CD. This effect is caused by the interference of light waves reflecting off the top and bottom of a microscopic thin film on the surface. Babylon.js can simulate this effect directly within the PBR shader.   

To implement iridescence, a developer enables the iridescence plugin on a PBRMaterial instance. This exposes a set of properties for configuration:

pbr.iridescence.isEnabled = true;

intensity: A scalar that controls the overall strength of the effect.

indexOfRefraction: The refractive index of the thin film.

thickness: The thickness of the thin film, which directly influences the colors that will be produced by the interference. An iridescenceTexture can also be used to vary this thickness across the surface of the material.

This effect can also be created visually in the Node Material Editor using the dedicated Iridescence block, which is then connected to the iridescence input of the PBRMetallicRoughness block.   

Subsurface Scattering (SSS)
Subsurface scattering is a crucial effect for rendering translucent materials. Instead of light simply reflecting off the surface, it penetrates the material, scatters internally, and exits at a nearby point. This is what gives materials like skin, wax, marble, and milk their characteristic soft, glowing appearance. Babylon.js implements SSS as part of its PBRMaterial.   

To enable SSS, the subSurface plugin on the PBRMaterial must be configured. This involves several key properties:

pbr.subSurface.isRefractionEnabled or isTranslucencyEnabled: These booleans activate the subsurface effect. Refraction is used for clear, glass-like materials, while translucency is for softer, more diffuse materials like skin.

tintColor: Defines the color that the light becomes as it is absorbed while traveling through the material.

tintColorAtDistance: Specifies the distance the light must travel through the material to achieve the full tintColor.

thicknessTexture: A texture map can be provided to control the thickness of the object on a per-pixel basis. This is essential for objects with varying thickness, as it allows light to pass through thinner parts more easily.   

Faking Depth: Parallax Occlusion Mapping for Detailed Surfaces
While normal mapping is a common technique for adding the illusion of surface detail by faking the way light reflects, it breaks down at grazing angles, where the surface still appears perfectly flat. Parallax Occlusion Mapping (POM) is a more advanced and convincing shader technique that enhances this illusion by actually displacing the texture coordinates based on a height map and the viewing angle. This creates a powerful sense of depth and allows surfaces to occlude themselves, making flat planes look like they have real, complex geometry.   

The implementation of POM in Babylon.js is treated as an extension of bump mapping. It requires a normal map texture where the height information is stored in the alpha channel.

Using StandardMaterial or PBRMaterial: To enable the effect, two properties must be set to true: material.useParallax = true; and material.useParallaxOcclusion = true;. The apparent depth of the effect is controlled by the parallaxScaleBias property, with higher values creating a more extreme depth effect.   

Using the Node Material Editor: The PerturbNormal block is used to handle normal and parallax mapping. By checking the "Parallax Occlusion" option on this block, the more advanced algorithm is enabled. The block requires inputs for the normal/height texture and the parallax scale.   

Eliminating Seams: Triplanar Mapping for Procedural Terrains
A common challenge in 3D graphics is creating seamless textures for complex or procedurally generated meshes, where traditional UV unwrapping is impractical or results in stretching and distortion. Triplanar mapping is a shader-based technique that solves this problem by projecting textures onto the mesh from three orthogonal axes (X, Y, and Z) and blending them based on the direction of the surface normal. This ensures that the texture is applied evenly and without seams, regardless of the mesh's topology or lack of UV coordinates.   

Using TriPlanarMaterial: The Babylon.js Materials Library provides a ready-to-use TriPlanarMaterial. A developer simply needs to provide up to three diffuse textures and three normal maps, one for each axis (diffuseTextureX, normalTextureY, etc.). The tileSize property can be used to control the scale of the projected textures.   

Using the Node Material Editor: The NME includes a TriPlanar block that encapsulates this logic. It takes a texture as input and uses the mesh's world position and normal to output the correctly blended texture color, which can then be used as the base color for a PBR or standard material.   

Animating Surfaces: A Primer on Animated Texture Shaders
Shaders can also be used to create materials that are not static, but animate over time. This is achieved by manipulating texture coordinates or using textures as data maps to drive animation directly on the GPU.

UV Scrolling: This is the simplest form of texture animation. By adding a time-based offset to the UV coordinates used to sample a texture in the fragment shader, the texture can be made to scroll across the surface. This is highly effective for creating effects like flowing water, moving energy fields, or conveyor belts.   

Sprite Sheet Animation: For 2D animations on a 3D plane, a sprite sheet (a single texture containing all frames of an animation in a grid) can be used. Instead of swapping textures on the CPU, a custom shader can be used. The shader takes a "frame index" as a uniform and uses it to calculate the correct UV offset and scale to display only the desired frame from the sprite sheet. This is far more performant than CPU-based methods when rendering many animated sprites.   

Baked Vertex Animation (VAT): For complex 3D skeletal animations, the entire animation can be "baked" into a texture. Each pixel of this Vertex Animation Texture (VAT) stores positional data for a vertex at a specific frame of the animation. A custom vertex shader then reads from this texture based on the current animation time and uses the data to displace the mesh's vertices. This technique offloads the entire burden of skeletal animation—normally a CPU-intensive task—to the GPU. It is an incredibly powerful optimization for scenes with large crowds of animated characters, though it comes with the trade-off of increased texture memory usage and the inability to blend between animations. Babylon.js provides a    

VertexAnimationBaker class to facilitate the creation of these animation textures.

The advanced material techniques available in Babylon.js fundamentally alter the relationship between an object's visual complexity and its geometric complexity. Parallax Occlusion Mapping allows a simple, flat quad to appear as a detailed, rugged stone wall, while normal mapping can add intricate surface details to a low-polygon character model. This decoupling is a cornerstone of modern real-time graphics, enabling the creation of visually rich and detailed worlds that can still perform efficiently on the limited resources of a web browser. The asset creation pipeline shifts from a focus on high-polygon modeling to the artistic creation of high-quality texture maps that encode this complex surface information.   

Furthermore, the architecture of the PBRMaterial in Babylon.js reveals that it is not a monolithic entity but a highly extensible and modular shader framework. Features like iridescence and subsurface scattering are implemented as plugins that can be attached to the base material. This means that the final compiled shader only includes the code for the features that are actively being used, preventing unnecessary performance overhead. This plugin-based architecture, which can even be extended by developers with their own custom code injections, is key to the material's power, allowing it to serve as a high-performance foundation for a vast range of realistic surface effects.   

Part VI: Optimization, Debugging, and Final Recommendations
Creating advanced shaders is only half the battle; ensuring they run efficiently and are free of errors is equally critical, especially in the performance-sensitive environment of the web. This final section provides essential guidance on optimizing shader performance, introduces powerful tools for debugging GLSL code within a Babylon.js context, and synthesizes the guide's lessons into a set of best practices for production-level development.

Performance Considerations for Complex Shaders
The performance of a shader is directly related to the number of calculations the GPU must perform for every vertex and, more critically, for every pixel on the screen. Keeping shaders lean and efficient is key to maintaining a smooth frame rate.

Instruction Count: Every mathematical operation, logical comparison, and function call in a shader contributes to its instruction count. Fragment shaders are particularly performance-sensitive as they run for millions of pixels per frame. Complex calculations, especially those inside loops, should be used judiciously. Where possible, calculations that are constant across the mesh can be pre-calculated on the CPU and passed in as a uniform.

Texture Lookups: Sampling from textures is not a "free" operation; it consumes memory bandwidth and can be a performance bottleneck. To minimize this, it is best practice to combine multiple grayscale maps into the individual channels of a single texture. For example, a common PBR workflow involves "channel packing," where the ambient occlusion map is stored in the red channel, the roughness map in the green channel, and the metallic map in the blue channel of a single texture. This allows the shader to retrieve three separate material properties with a single texture lookup.   

Branching (if statements): On many GPU architectures, all threads in a processing group execute the same code path. When an if statement is encountered, some threads may take one branch while others take the other. In this scenario, the GPU may have to execute both branches and then discard the results for the threads where the condition was false. This can be inefficient. While modern GPUs handle branching more effectively, it is still a good practice to avoid complex conditional logic in performance-critical shaders where possible. Smooth mathematical functions like step() and smoothstep() can often be used to achieve similar results to an if statement without explicit branching.

Precision: As discussed in Part I, GLSL allows for different levels of floating-point precision (highp, mediump, lowp). While vertex positions require highp for accuracy, many calculations in the fragment shader, such as color manipulations, can often be performed at mediump or even lowp without any perceptible loss in visual quality. Using lower precision where appropriate can lead to significant performance gains on mobile and lower-end GPUs.

Debugging GLSL with Spector.js and Browser Tools
When a shader produces unexpected results, debugging can be challenging due to its "black box" nature on the GPU. Fortunately, Babylon.js is supported by powerful debugging tools.

Spector.js: This is an indispensable tool for any WebGL developer. Developed by the Babylon.js team, Spector.js can capture a single frame of a WebGL application and provide a complete, step-by-step breakdown of every single draw call and state change that occurred. For a given draw call that uses a custom shader, Spector allows a developer to inspect:   

The exact values of all uniforms that were passed from JavaScript.

The data contained within the attribute buffers.

The textures that were bound to the shader's samplers.

The complete, compiled GLSL source code for both the vertex and fragment shaders.
This level of introspection is invaluable for diagnosing issues where the data being sent to the shader is incorrect or the shader logic itself is flawed.

Visual Debugging Techniques: A simple yet effective way to debug a shader is to use its color output to visualize intermediate data. Instead of outputting the final lit color, a developer can temporarily modify the fragment shader to output a variable they wish to inspect. For example, to verify that surface normals are correct, one could use gl_FragColor = vec4(normal * 0.5 + 0.5, 1.0);. This will render the object with its normals visualized as colors, making it easy to spot any errors. This technique can be used to visualize UV coordinates, world positions, texture values, or any other variable in the shader. For those using the Node Material Editor, the Debug block provides an even easier way to do this, allowing the output of any node in the graph to be visualized as a color in the preview window.   

Synthesis and Best Practices for Production Environments
This guide has covered a vast range of techniques, from the foundational principles of the rendering pipeline to the implementation of highly advanced visual effects. To apply this knowledge effectively in a production environment, several key principles should be followed.

Start with the Highest Abstraction: Always begin with the highest-level Babylon.js feature that can achieve the desired effect. If a dynamic sky is needed, start with the SkyMaterial. Only if its limitations are reached should one move to building a custom solution with the Node Material Editor or a ShaderMaterial. This approach maximizes development speed and leverages the highly optimized and tested code of the core engine.

Profile Early and Often: Performance should not be an afterthought. From the beginning of a project, use the browser's developer tools and the Babylon.js Inspector to constantly monitor the frame rate and identify performance bottlenecks. If a newly implemented shader causes a significant drop in performance, it should be optimized immediately.

Leverage the Community and its Resources: The Babylon.js forum is a vibrant and supportive community. It is an invaluable resource where developers of all skill levels, including the core engine team, actively discuss problems and share solutions. Before embarking on a complex shader, it is always worth searching the forums, as it is likely that another member has already tackled a similar challenge and shared their results.   

Final Project Checklist: When starting a project that will heavily rely on custom shaders, consider the following:

Workflow: Will the team be more productive with the visual NME, the code-first ShaderMaterial, or a hybrid approach?

Asset Pipeline: Are artists prepared to create the necessary textures for advanced effects like PBR and Parallax Occlusion Mapping?

Performance Budget: What are the target devices? A shader that runs smoothly on a high-end desktop GPU may be unusable on a mobile device. Set a performance budget and stick to it.

Fallback Strategy: For effects that rely on advanced features like WebGL2, have a plan for how the application will gracefully degrade on older hardware that may not support them.

By combining a solid theoretical understanding with a strategic approach to implementation and a commitment to performance, developers can unlock the full power of the GPU with Babylon.js, creating web-based 3D experiences that are as visually breathtaking as they are technically robust.


Sources used in the report

doc.babylonjs.com
Introduction to Shaders | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

smashingmagazine.com
Building Shaders With Babylon.js — Smashing Magazine
Opens in a new window

developer.mozilla.org
GLSL shaders - Game development | MDN
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Vertical Wave with Vertex Shader | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

waelyasmina.net
GLSL and Shaders Tutorial for Beginners (WebGL / Threejs) - Wael Yasmina
Opens in a new window

tutorialspoint.com
BabylonJS - ShaderMaterial - Tutorials Point
Opens in a new window

babylonjs.com
Babylon.js: Powerful, Beautiful, Simple, Open - Web-Based 3D At Its Best
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Writing shaders for WebGPU in WGSL - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Vertex Color input in babylon shaders? - Questions
Opens in a new window

babylonjsguide.github.io
Shader - Material - BabylonJS Guide
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Shader Material | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Putting Shader Code Into Babylon.js
Opens in a new window

babylonjsguide.github.io
Putting Shader Code in BJS - BabylonJS Guide
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Supporting Fog With ShaderMaterial | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Node Material - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
The Node Material Editor | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

babylonjs.medium.com
Creating the Babylon.js Node Material - Medium
Opens in a new window

babylonjs.medium.com
Procedural Node Material Shaders: 3 Tips For Getting Started | by Babylon.js | Medium
Opens in a new window

youtube.com
PBR Nodes in Node Materials Part 1 - YouTube
Opens in a new window

nodematerial-editor.babylonjs.com
Babylon.js Node Material Editor
Opens in a new window

youtube.com
Node Material Editor: Using Your Materials - YouTube
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Already new standard material, based on NodeMaterial? - Questions - Babylon.js
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Tutorial for node material - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
NME Beginner - How to make an island color Shader - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Is there a plan for material plugin to support NodeMaterial and ShaderMaterial
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Skyboxes | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

babylonjsguide.github.io
Skybox - BabylonJS Guide
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Getting Started - Chapter 5 - Skies Above | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

stackoverflow.com
How to make a very large skybox? (babylon.js) - Stack Overflow
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to create a skybox like the one in the sandbox? - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Changing dynamically the skybox reflection texture - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

medium.com
Image-based lighting and changing skyboxes in BabylonJS | by Joel Malone | Medium
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Sky Material | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Programmatic / procedural skybox - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Seeking Advanced Day and Night Cycle Example - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
SkyMaterial luminance before sunrise/after sunset - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Getting Started - Chapter 7 - Day to Night - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

github.com
A simple implementation of volumetric atmospheric scattering using babylonjs. - GitHub
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Volumetric Atmospheric Scattering - Demos and projects - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

alanzucconi.com
Atmospheric Scattering Shader - Alan Zucconi
Opens in a new window

stackoverflow.com
How can I render an 'atmosphere' over a rendering of the Earth in Three.js? - Stack Overflow
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Uniform arrays with non uniform control texture sample (WebGPU) - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
WIP: Real Scale Planet - Demos and projects - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Particles - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Particle System - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
The Particle Helper | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to expand the scope of rain - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Particle System Intro | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Project Snowball - Winter is coming (NEW update v.0.8.5.3 #BJS v5.6)
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Particle Systems - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Customizing Particles - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Atmospheric Scene of Rain - Demos and projects - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Screen Space Reflections (SSR) Rendering Pipeline - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Environment | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Volumetric Light Scattering Post Process | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

babylonjs.com
Volumetric Light Scattering demo - Babylon.js
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Use fog at certain part of the world? - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
[Service request] Convert threejs vertical fog shader to babylonjs
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Cloud Procedural Texture | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Performant volumetric clouds - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

html5gamedevs.com
Photorealistic Skydome for Babylon - HTML5 Game Devs Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
PBRIridescenceConfiguration - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Is it possible to make iridescent materials? - Questions - Babylon JS Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
PBRSubSurfaceConfiguration - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Mastering PBR Materials | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Support Screen Space Subsurface Scattering - Completed Features - Babylon.js
Opens in a new window

tutorialspoint.com
BabylonJS - Parallax Mapping - Tutorials Point
Opens in a new window

grideasy.github.io
Using Parallax Mapping - BabylonJS Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Parallax Mapping - Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Tri-Planar Mapping Material | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Rotate World-Positioned texture so it is flat to each surface normal - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to implement a shader with light flow effect along a specific path (tube mesh)
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
Proper way to animate a texture attached to a mesh? - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

doc.babylonjs.com
Baked Texture Animations | Babylon.js Documentation
Opens in a new window

grideasy.github.io
Advanced Texturing - BabylonJS Documentation
Opens in a new window

babylonjs.medium.com
Customizing Materials: The Community Ninja Tale | by Babylon.js - Medium
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to simulate cloud shadows on the ground (no actual clouds needed) - Questions
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
MixMaterial and Shader - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to create two custom shaders materials? - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

forum.babylonjs.com
How to do lighting with ShaderMaterial? - Questions - Babylon.js Forum
Opens in a new window

Sources read but not used in the report
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window
Opens in a new window

Thoughts
